docs: update spec for timestamping (#290)
notaryproject/notaryproject: specs/signature-specification.md

- Payload/Message `m`: The data that is integrity protected - e.g. descriptor of the artifact being signed.
- Signed attributes `v`: The signature metadata that is integrity protected - e.g. signature expiration time, creation time, etc.

> - Unsigned attributes `u`: These attributes are not signed by the signing key that generates the signature. We anticipate unsigned attributes contain content that may be signed by a different party e.g. Certificate chain signed by a CA, or Timestamping countersignature signed by a TSA.

Reviewer: nit: 
```suggestion
- Unsigned attributes `u`: These attributes are not signed by the signing key that generates the signature. We anticipate unsigned attributes contain content that may be signed by a different party e.g. Certificate chain signed by a CA, or timestamping countersignature signed by a TSA.
```

> - Unsigned attributes `u`: These attributes are not signed by the signing key that generates the signature. We anticipate unsigned attributes contain content that may be signed by a different party e.g. Certificate chain signed by a CA, or timestamping countersignature signed by a TSA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Unsigned attributes `u`: These attributes are not signed by the signing key that generates the signature. We anticipate unsigned attributes contain content that may be signed by a different party e.g. certificate chain signed by a CA, or timestamping countersignature signed by a TSA.
```

> - Primitive signature `s`: The digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes.

Reviewer 3: Why did we change `Cryptographic` to `Primitive`?

IMO we should call it primary signature.

A signature envelope is `e = {m, v, u, s}` where `s` is signature.

> This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary Project signature. This specification aims to be be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in separate specs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary Project signature. This specification aims to be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in separate specs.
```

These attributes are considered unsigned with respect to the signing key that generates the signature.

- **Certificate Chain**: This is a REQUIRED attribute that contains the ordered list of X.509 public certificates associated with the signing key used to generate the signature. The ordered list starts with the signing certificate, any intermediate certificates and ends with the root certificate. The certificate chain MUST be authenticated against a trust store as part of signature validation. Specific requirements for the certificates in the chain are provided [here](#certificate-requirements).

> - **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature generated by a trusted third party, such as a Timestamp Authority (TSA). Its purpose is to demonstrate that the primitive signature, computed on payload and signed attributes, predates the stamped time point. Only [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant timestamp signatures are supported. If present, this claim is validated and used solely under the [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) signing scheme.

Reviewer: Request rephrasing for "Its purpose is to demonstrate that the primitive signature, computed on payload and signed attributes, predates the stamped time point."

These attributes are considered unsigned with respect to the signing key that generates the signature.

- **Certificate Chain**: This is a REQUIRED attribute that contains the ordered list of X.509 public certificates associated with the signing key used to generate the signature. The ordered list starts with the signing certificate, any intermediate certificates and ends with the root certificate. The certificate chain MUST be authenticated against a trust store as part of signature validation. Specific requirements for the certificates in the chain are provided [here](#certificate-requirements).

> - **Timestamp Signature** (critical): An OPTIONAL countersignature which provides [authentic signing time](#signing-time--authentic-signing-time) for signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509), e.g. Timestamp Authority (TSA) generated timestamp signature. Only [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant TimeStampToken are currently supported. When provided, this claim is only validated and used under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).

Reviewer: It is indeed "authentic timestamp", not "authentic signing time".

> - **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature. It is generated by a trusted third party to prove that the `primitive signature (the digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes)` was generated before the time point been stamped. The only supported trusted third party is [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant `Timestamp Authority (TSA)`. When provided, this claim is only validated and used under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature generated by a trusted third party, such as a Timestamp Authority (TSA). Its purpose is to demonstrate that the primitive signature, computed on payload and signed attributes, predates the stamped time. Only [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant timestamp signatures are supported. If present, this claim is validated and used solely under the [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) signing scheme .
```

> - **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature. It is generated by a trusted third party to prove that the `primitive signature (the digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes)` was created on or before the time point been stamped. The only supported trusted third party is [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant `Timestamp Authority (TSA)`. When provided, this claim is only validated and used under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).

Reviewer: nit: technically it cannot be on due to network roundtrip
```suggestion
- **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature. It is generated by a trusted third party to prove that the `primitive signature (the digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes)` was created before the time point been stamped. The only supported trusted third party is [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant `Timestamp Authority (TSA)`. When provided, this claim is only validated and used under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).
```

> - **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature. It is generated by a trusted third party to prove that the `cryptographic signature (the digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes)` was created on or before the time point been stamped. The only supported trusted third party is [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant `Timestamp Authority (TSA)`. When provided, this claim is only validated and used under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).

Reviewer: `cryptographic signature (the digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes)` <- it is called a "primitive signature".

> - **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature. It is generated by a trusted third party to prove that the `Cryptographic signature (the digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes)` was created on or before the time point been stamped. The only supported such trusted third party is [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant `Timestamp Authority (TSA)`. When provided, this claim is only validated and used under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Timestamp Signature**: An OPTIONAL countersignature. It is generated by a trusted third party to prove that the `cryptographic signature (the digital signature computed on payload and signed attributes)` was created on or before the time point that has been stamped. The only supported trusted third party is a [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant `Timestamp Authority (TSA)`. When provided, this claim is only validated and used under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).
```

### Certificate Requirements

The **codesigning** certificates MUST meet the following requirements. These requirements are validated both at signature generation time and signature verification time, and are applied to the certificate chain in the signature envelope. These validations are independent of certificate chain validation against a trust store.

> The **timestamping** certificates MUST meet the following requirements as well. Requirements for leaf certificate are validated both at timestamp token generation and verification time. Requirements for root and intermediate CA certificates are only validated at timestamp token verification time. This is because at generation time, the client is NOT required to have access to the full certificate chain of the Timestamp Authority (TSA). These validations are independent of certificate chain validation against a trust store.

Reviewer: > This is because at generation time, the client is NOT required to have access to the full certificate chain of the Timestamp Authority (TSA).

Can the full chain be requested through the TSP by toggling `certReq` to `true`?

> The **timestamping** certificates MUST meet the following requirements as well. Requirements for leaf certificate are validated both at timestamp token generation and verification time. Requirements for root and intermediate CA certificates are only validated at timestamp token verification time. This is because at generation time, the client is NOT required to have access to the full certificate chain of the Timestamp Authority (TSA). These validations are independent of certificate chain validation against a trust store.

Reviewer 3: * At present, the notation does not facilitate the reading of the certificate chain from outside the signature. Should we conduct the validation of the root and intermediate CA (Certificate Authority) certificates during both  signing and verification?
* `These validations are independent of certificate chain validation against a trust store.` At verification we should validate against trust store.

Reviewer 3: As per today's community meeting, @Two-Hearts will analyze response from commonly used tsa to check if they return cert chain as part of timestamp. If majority of them provide cert chain in signature we can impose cert-chain validation during signing.

Also, we can always support additional usecase of supplying cert chain from outside signature.

Reviewer 3: >http://timestamp.digicert.com and http://timestamp.apple.com/ts01 are returning certs with signature algorithm SHA1.
What does that mean? Certs are signed using SHA1 ?

Reviewer 2: Created the issue https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/issues/302 for tracking further work according to community meeting on Jun 17 @priteshbandi @Two-Hearts

#### Root and Intermediate CA Certificates

The CA certificates MUST meet the following requirements

1. **[Basic Constraints:](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.9)**
The `basicConstraints` extension MUST be present and MUST be marked as critical. The `cA` field MUST be set to `true`.
The [`pathLenConstraint`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.9) field is OPTIONAL. If present, it MUST be verified against the depth of the chain below that CA certificate. (If value is null consider it as not present)
1. **[Key Usage:](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.3)**
    - **For codesigning certificate:** the `keyUsage` extension MUST be present and MUST be marked critical.

>     - **For timestamping certificate:** the `keyUsage` extension MUST be present and SHOULD be marked critical.

Reviewer 3: For timestamping root/subordinate CA, why keyusage is `SHOULD` be marked critical` instead of MUST?

Reviewer 2: @priteshbandi This is for compatibility reasons. We did some tests with existing TSAs and found some TSAs do not mark `keyUsage` as critical.

Reviewer 3: for posterity, can you please share, list of TSA tested and there results?

Reviewer 2: > for posterity, can you please share, list of TSA tested and there results?

Hi @priteshbandi, @Two-Hearts will provide a list of tested TSAs combining results of certificate chain testing based on our community discussion on Jun 10 2024. For the existing TSAs that `keyUsage` of root CA certificate is not marked critical, see the root CA certificate named `Microsoft Root Certificate Authority 2010` listed in this page https://www.microsoft.com/pkiops/docs/repository.htm. Hope it helps.

## Appendix

### Signing time & Authentic Signing time

A `signing time` denotes the time at which the signature was generated. An X509 certificate has a defined [validity](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5) during which it can be used to generate signatures. The signing time must be greater than or equal to certificate's `notBefore` attribute, and the signing time must be less than or equal to certificate's `notAfter` attribute. Signatures generated outside the certificate's validity are considered invalid. 

> An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a `Signing Authority (SA)`. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. This is ONLY supported under signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority). The `authentic signing time` is determined and MUST be provided by the *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute in the signature envelope. Signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) does NOT have the concept of `authentic signing time`.

Reviewer: Instead of saying `notary.x509` does not have the concept of "authentic signing time", will it be better to say that "authentic signing time" is only available in `notary.x509.signingAuthority` (until we add a new signing scheme to this spec)?

> *Note*: The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute does NOT provide an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509). This attribute ONLY proves that the `cryptographic signature` in the signature envelope was created on or before the time point been stamped. The phrase `time point been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `cryptographic signature`.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute does NOT provide an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509). This attribute ONLY proves that the `cryptographic signature` in the signature envelope was created on or before the time point been stamped. The phrase `time point been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `cryptographic signature`.
```
It renders
> [!NOTE]
> The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute does NOT provide an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509). This attribute ONLY proves that the `cryptographic signature` in the signature envelope was created on or before the time point been stamped. The phrase `time point been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `cryptographic signature`.

## Appendix

### Signing time & Authentic Signing time

A `signing time` denotes the time at which the signature was generated. An X509 certificate has a defined [validity](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5) during which it can be used to generate signatures. The signing time must be greater than or equal to certificate's `notBefore` attribute, and the signing time must be less than or equal to certificate's `notAfter` attribute. Signatures generated outside the certificate's validity are considered invalid. 

> An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a `Signing Authority (SA)`. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. `Authentic signing time` is ONLY available under signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority). It is determined and MUST be provided by the *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute in the signature envelope.

Reviewer: It is not necessary to make _ONLY_ uppercase. You may be curious on the capitalized `MUST` or other keywords. Those keywords are defined in [BCP 14](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14).

> An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a `Signing Authority (SA)`. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. `Authentic signing time` is only available under signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority). It is determined and MUST be provided by the *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute in the signature envelope.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a `Signing Authority (SA)`. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. `Authentic signing time` should only be used with signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority). It is present under  *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute of the signature envelope.
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute does NOT provide an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509). *Timestamp Signature* ONLY proves that the `primitive signature` in the signature envelope was created on or before the time point been stamped. The phrase `time point been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `primitive signature`.

Reviewer: nit: followed by the previous comment, consider
```suggestion
> The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute MUST NOT be used as an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) as successful verification of the timestamp signature only implies that the `primitive signature` in the signature envelope was generated before the time point been stamped. The phrase `time point been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `primitive signature`.
```

> > The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute MUST NOT be used as an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) as successful verification of the timestamp signature only implies that the `primitive signature` in the signature envelope was generated before the time point been stamped. The phrase `time point been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `primitive signature`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute MUST NOT be used as an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) as successful verification of the timestamp signature only implies that the `primitive signature` in the signature envelope was generated before the time point been stamped. The phrase `time point been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` signed the `primitive signature`.
```

technically TSA doesnt gets signature.

## Appendix

> ### Signing time & Authentic Signing time

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can separate Signing time and Authentic Signing time?

> A `signing time` denotes the time at which the signature was generated. A X509 certificate has a defined [validity](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5) during which it can be used to generate signatures. The signing time must be greater than or equal to certificate's `notBefore` attribute, and the signing time must be less than or equal to certificate's `notAfter` attribute. Signatures generated outside the certificate's validity are considered invalid. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A `signing time` denotes the time at which the signature was generated. An X.509 certificate has a defined [validity](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5) during which it can be used to generate signatures. The signing time must be greater than or equal to certificate's `notBefore` attribute, and the signing time must be less than or equal to certificate's `notAfter` attribute. Signatures generated outside the certificate's validity are considered invalid. 
```

> An authentic timestamp, like TSA countersignature, allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. 

Reviewer 2: At the beginning of this spec, TSA was updated to Timestamping, should we use the same language?

> An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a trusted third party. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. Notary project supports two such trusted third parities. They are timestamp authority (TSA) and signing authority (SA).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a trusted third party. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. Notary Project supports two such trusted third parities. They are timestamp authority (TSA) and signing authority (SA).
```

Reviewer 4: Also, should we use capitalized format in the first letter of each term? See https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3628#section-3.2

- Time-Stamping Authority (TSA) 
- Signing Authority (SA)

Under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509), the `authentic signing time` is determined by the OPTIONAL *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute in the signature envelope. The trusted third party is Timestamp Authority (TSA) in this case. When NOT provided, every certificate in the chain MUST be valid at the time of verification.

> Under signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority), the `authentic signing time` is determined and MUST be provided by the *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute in the signature envelope. The trusted third party is the Signing Authority (SA) in this case.

Reviewer: Those concepts are misunderstood. Let's sync up offline for clarifications.

A `signing time` denotes the time at which the signature was generated. An X509 certificate has a defined [validity](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5) during which it can be used to generate signatures. The signing time must be greater than or equal to certificate's `notBefore` attribute, and the signing time must be less than or equal to certificate's `notAfter` attribute. Signatures generated outside the certificate's validity are considered invalid. 

> An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a `Signing Authority (SA)`. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. This is ONLY supported under signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority), the `authentic signing time` is determined and MUST be provided by the *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute in the signature envelope. Signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) does NOT have the concept `authentic signing time`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a `Signing Authority (SA)`. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. This is supported exclusively under the signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority), the `authentic signing time` is determined and MUST be provided by the *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute in the signature envelope. The signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) does NOT include the concept of `authentic signing time`.
```

> *Special note*: The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute does NOT provide an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509). This attribute ONLY proves that the `Cryptographic signature` in the signature envelope was created on or before the time point been stamped. The `time point been stamped` here means the particular time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `Cryptographic signature`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Note*: The *Timestamp Signature* unsigned attribute does NOT provide an `authentic signing time` under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509). This attribute ONLY proves that the `cryptographic signature` in the signature envelope was created on or before the time point that has been stamped. The phrase `time point that has been stamped` refers to the specific time point at which the `Timestamp Authority (TSA)` receives the `Cryptographic signature`.
```

1. **[Basic Constraints:](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.9)**
The `basicConstraints` extension is OPTIONAL and can OPTIONALLY be marked as critical. If present, the `cA` field MUST be set to `false`.
1. **[Key Usage:](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.3)**
    - **For codesigning certificate:** the `keyUsage` extension MUST be present and MUST be marked critical.

>     - **For timestamping certificate:** the `keyUsage` extension MUST be present and SHOULD be marked critical.

Reviewer 3: ditto

1. **[Key Usage:](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.3)**
The `keyUsage` extension MUST be present and MUST be marked critical. Bit positions for `digitalSignature` MUST be set. The Bit positions for `keyEncipherment`, `dataEncipherment`, `keyAgreement`, `keyCertSign`, `encipherOnly`, `decipherOnly` and `cRLSign` MUST NOT be set.
1. **[Extended Key Usage:](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.12)**  The `extendedKeyUsage` extension is OPTIONAL and can OPTIONALLY be marked as critical.
    - **For signing certificate:** If present, the value MAY contain `id-kp-codeSigning` and MUST NOT contain `anyExtendedKeyUsage`, `serverAuth`, `clientAuth`, `emailProtection` and `timeStamping`.
    - **For timestamping certificate:** If present, the value MUST contain `id-kp-timeStamping` and MUST NOT contain `anyExtendedKeyUsage`, `serverAuth`, `clientAuth`, `emailProtection` and `codeSigning`.
1. **Key Length** The certificate MUST abide by the following key length restrictions:
    - For RSA public key, the key length MUST be 2048 bits or higher.

>     - For ECDSA public key, the key length MUST be 256 bits or higher.

Reviewer: Why is this part removed?

1. Any certificate in the certificate chain MUST NOT use SHA1WithRSA and ECDSAWithSHA1 signatures.
2. Only Basic Constraints, Key Usage, and Extended Key Usage extensions of X.509 certificates are honored. For rest of the extensions, implementations of the Notary Project signature specification MUST fail open i.e. rest of the extensions MUST NOT be evaluated or honored.
3. The certificates in the certificate chain MUST be valid at signing time. Implementations of the Notary Project signature specification MUST NOT enforce validity period nesting, i.e the validity period for a given certificate may not fall entirely within the validity period of that certificate's issuer certificate.
4. **For codesigning certificate:** In the absence of an Authentic Timestamp, each and every certificate in the certificate chain i.e. signing certificate, intermediate certificates, and the root certificate must be valid i.e. not expired at the time of signature verification.

>    **For timestamping certificate:** Certificates in the timestamp certificate chain MAY expire at the time of verification due to existence of short-lived TSA certificates. Implementaions SHOULD provide an option for users to choose between: 1. Use the time at verification to verify the timestamp countersignature. 2. Use the time point been stamped to verify the timestamp countersignature.

Reviewer: Request rephrasing for this paragraph for easier understanding.

1. Any certificate in the certificate chain MUST NOT use SHA1WithRSA and ECDSAWithSHA1 signatures.
2. Only Basic Constraints, Key Usage, and Extended Key Usage extensions of X.509 certificates are honored. For rest of the extensions, implementations of the Notary Project signature specification MUST fail open i.e. rest of the extensions MUST NOT be evaluated or honored.
3. The certificates in the certificate chain MUST be valid at signing time. Implementations of the Notary Project signature specification MUST NOT enforce validity period nesting, i.e the validity period for a given certificate may not fall entirely within the validity period of that certificate's issuer certificate.
4. **For codesigning certificate:** In the absence of an Authentic Timestamp, each and every certificate in the certificate chain i.e. signing certificate, intermediate certificates, and the root certificate must be valid i.e. not expired at the time of signature verification.

>    **For timestamping certificate:** Certificates in the timestamp certificate chain MAY expire at the time of verification due to existence of short-lived TSA certificates. Implementations should allow users to choose whether to verify the timestamp countersignature based on the verification time or the original timestamped time.

Reviewer: > Implementations should allow users to choose whether to verify the timestamp countersignature based on the verification time or the original timestamped time.

Is this statement still valid?

Reviewer: Deletion observed.

>    **For timestamping certificate:** Certificates in the timestamp certificate chain MAY expire at the time of verification due to existence of short-lived TSA certificates. Implementations should allow users to choose whether to verify the timestamp countersignature based on the verification time or the original timestamped time.

Reviewer: > due to existence of short-lived TSA certificates.

We can remove this part as it also applies to long-lived TSA certificates.

Reviewer: Deletion observed.

## Appendix

### Signing time
### Signing time & Authentic Signing time

A `signing time` denotes the time at which the signature was generated. An X509 certificate has a defined [validity](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5) during which it can be used to generate signatures. The signing time must be greater than or equal to certificate's `notBefore` attribute, and the signing time must be less than or equal to certificate's `notAfter` attribute. Signatures generated outside the certificate's validity are considered invalid. 

An `authentic signing time` is a signing time authenticated by a `Signing Authority (SA)`. It allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated within the certificate's validity. `Authentic signing time` is only used with signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority). It is REQUIRED and MUST be present under the *Authentic Signing Time* signed attribute of the signature envelope.

> The signing time denotes the time at which the signature was generated. A X509 certificate has a defined [validity](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5) during which it can be used to generate signatures. The signing time must be greater than or equal to certificate's `notBefore` attribute, and signing time must be less than or equal to certificate's `notAfter` attribute. Signatures generated after the certificate expires are considered invalid. An authentic timestamp, like TSA countersignature, allows a verifier to determine if the signature was generated when the certificate was valid. It also allows a verifier to determine if a signature be treated as valid when a certificate is revoked, if the certificate was revoked after the signature was generated. In the absence of an authentic timestamp, signatures are considered invalid after certificate expires, and all signatures are considered revoked when a certificate is revoked.

Reviewer: The revocation story is missing.
